From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hansel minutes, weekly discussion
with web developer and technologist
and Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number one 30 recorded
live Friday, September 19th, 2008. Support for
Hanselman it's just provided by
Tellerik rad controls, the most
comprehensive suite of components for
windows forms and asp.net web
applications online@wwwdotterikdotcomandby.net developers journal the
world's leading.net developer magazine online
at www dot  dot
com. In this episode, Scott
talks to JavaScript with Brandon
type. I, this is Scott
Hanselman, and this is another
episode of Hansel minutes. And
I'm sitting down today with
Brendan Eich chief technology officer
at MoCo Mozilla corporation. Thank
you, sheriff, for taking the
time to chat with me
today. No, there's a lot
of really amazing stuff going
on in JavaScript right now.
It feels like there was
a, an amazing resurgence, you
know, after XML HTTP request
kind of showed up in
Firefox and, you know, Ajax
kind of leapt out of
the I E world and
into the, into the mainstream.
But do you think that
JavaScript as a language has,
has moved much, much beyond
kind of it's one point
to kind of state there's
a lot happened between then
and now? I think so
a lot of dot releases,
at least on our side,
we we've been adding values
JavaScript over the years. So
1.5 was the release from
10 years ago and we've
done at 1.6. That was
in a Firefox one five.
If I recall correctly, we
did 1.7 Joshua at 1.7
in Firefox to JavaScript 1.8
in Firefox three. If you're
seeing a trend here towards
JavaScript two, you wouldn't be
too far wrong. We try
to standardize what we're doing.
And that was part of
our work with the AGMA
committee. And that's ongoing. It's
a little scale back from
the ambition to unify the
language in the flash player
or the target splash player
action, script three from Adobe,
but there are certainly a
lot of things in there
that we'd like to get
standardized. And as you said,
the performance is really getting
good now, so developers can
start using JavaScript in ways
that weren't possible before. What
is, can you, maybe you
could explain to kind of
some of the layman in
the audience, or what are
the relationship between ECMAScript 1.4
Java script and an action
script? What does that relationship?
So some of these are
trade names like action script,
and I guess JavaScript too.
That's just a, some Mark
that I think mobile has
been allowed to use for
a long time. Now Netscape
used it originally through a
trademark license. The, the Aqua
script name is, is sort
of an anti-trade Mark. It's
not really an attractive name.
The Atma standards body used
to stand for a European
computer manufacturers association it's worldwide.
And it's a fast track
into ISO the international standards
organization. And it's its name
is now just eczema proper
now. So ECMAScript is one
of the names used the
standard number is AGMA two
62, and these are not
names that are going to
sweep the world and be
on everyone's tongue. What the
standard allowed us to do
back in the day with
Netscape and Microsoft was to
agree on how the language
should work at its core,
which is the fundamental syntax
and semantics, not including the
document object model or the
browser sort of API APIs
that were there in those
days. And that standard in
spite of, you know, too
many flaws is actually a
pretty good standard. All things
considered because a lot of
language standards don't have to
be accurate in the crucible
of the web where interoperation
is King, where, what developers
know if something works differently
in, in, you know, Mozilla
versus I E they can
tell, and you can't hide
anything. A lot of computer
programming languages are under specified
intentionally. So that's compiler writers
to make them go very
fast and they are used
in various forms behind firewalls
or in silos. So you
use Microsoft visual C plus
plus, or you use the
canoe seed compiler or a
number of forceful compilers, I
think, which used to be
more popular and have been
eclipsed by one of the
two GCC or Microsoft seeking
power. Those, those compilers didn't
all agree on how the
C language of the C
plus plus language worked, not
just because the standard was
under specified on purpose, but
because there were actual bugs
or quirks in the compounders.
And no one noticed because
the code didn't have to
work across the web. So
JavaScript is probably the most
interoperatively implemented programming language in
the world. So the Atma
standard was the basis for
that interoperation, but the browser
vendors try to agree, at
least on that much. Sometimes
there are things that internet
Explorer never fixed based on
the ECMO standard. And we've
had to actually insert the
standard to match reality because
a market leader, as it
was and remains in some
ways can set the de
facto standard and it trumps
the standard. Do you think
that, that what you think
about some of the liberties
that are taken, like whether
it be I E or
some of the liberties that
Adobe takes with action script,
you know, and, and the
tend towards static typing, do
you think that those things
are a little bit of
a tug of war, or
do you feel that you've
firmly, you know, you and
ECMO firmly have a grip
on where JavaScript is heading
Well, Adobe it's something for
their developers that was designed
to make sort of flashed
development more like, you know,
windows or Java swing development,
dealing with a tool kit
with a class hierarchy, having
the ability to write down
type to annotate the types
of variables and arguments. This
has benefits for programming in
the large for making API
APIs, where you can count
on the values coming in,
being well conditioned or well
typed. There are limits to
it. And we're all familiar
with, from other languages because
many languages in the current
state of the art have
somewhat weak type systems with
very exotic, strong type systems.
Aren't used that much. And
I'm thinking of functional languages
like Haskell here, though. I
would say Jane street deaf,
a lot of camel programming.
So there's an exception, but,
but really action script three
was in some ways trying
to appeal to Java programmers,
or maybe you would say
C plus plus, or C
sharp programmers. And I think
it's been successful in its
domain. The type system in
ActionScript free was influential in
our work on the fourth
edition proposals for ECMAScript. And
there's still an active conversation
in the AGMA committee to
add an optional type system,
which is what's the actual
script three to JavaScript. Now
it wouldn't be something where
you had to annotate all
the variables. You could write
little untied, JavaScript like you
do today. And in feed,
you can do that. And
extra two with three, you're
just, I think, encouraged not
to buy the tooling that
Adobe has, but, you know,
there are reasons for that
tooling to want things to
be fully typed. If you're
just doing JavaScript for the
web it's on today, if
we ever do standardized the
type system, I think it'll
look like some of the
things we worked on and
maybe I'll have some other
features, but it will be
optional. And it'll have a
sort of dynamic flavor there
won't be this ahead of
time checking that says, well,
your, your, your file loaded,
but we can't compile it
because of some type of
error. And so you're not
going to have any rich
Ajax of app experience. Sorry,
it'll be a dynamic language
like, like, like Pearl Python
and Ruby with optional types.
And those languages have had
experimental variance in case of
Pearl pro six, I would
say, have type systems added
to them. So it sounds
like from your answer that
as a, as a line,
kind of as a language
walk, as a person involved
in languages that on the,
on the access of purist
versus pragmatist, you're kind of
flat in the middle. It
doesn't sound like you're really
pure peer dynamic languages. You
know, there's a pragmatism to
what you're saying. That is
a little surprising. Yeah. I'm
not religious. I have been
a Unix kernel hacker, which
was writing in C, which
is portable assembly language. I've
played with a lot of
languages and implemented language processes
for my whole career. And
going back into the graduate
and undergraduate studies, and, you
know, this is sort of
a dual or a sort
of a correspondence between statically
type languages and dynamically type
language is you can make
proofs out of your programs
in static type languages. If
the type system is sound
by writing down types of
variables and arguments and return
values, and these proofs can
be helpful, or they can
just be kind of tedious
and still not keep your
program from crashing depending on
the nature of the language
and the nature of the
type system. So, and if
you have a really sort
of advanced type system like
in Haskell, you can do
some amazing things, but it's
not yet well taught and
programmers tend to bounce off
it. So maybe that will
be the wave of the
future. I'm actually a fan
of languages like Haskell, but
right now people are being
taught Java. It's sort of
like the new cobalt it's
safer than C plus plus
it's memory safe. There are
no ways to forge pointers
or bad memory addresses, but
it's type system doesn't do
a lot for you. And
yet it requires you to
write things down sometimes redundantly
or sometimes tediously and sort
of without real benefit. So
this dynamic languages community has
had a resurgence lately. You've
seen this with the books
on Ruby versus Java and
sort of these fake food
fights that happen. I'm like
Ruby on rails versus the
three tier Java architecture that
with an AMEC languages, you
can sometimes write very generic,
functional code, functional programming that
doesn't have to worry about
ties to because it's universally
quantified. It works on any
type and you can be
very productive. And with the
right debugger and testing, you
can go a long way.
There still can be benefits
to having some kind of
type or contract system. That's
another sort of dynamic type
system. That's actually very expressive
where you can have your
API APIs decorated with extra
declarations that say here's what
the types should be or
here's what the contract should
be. And when someone violates
that contract, I'm thinking particularly
of the contract systems and
scheme, you get a good
error of blame pointing to
the originator of the bad
value. And this is really
good for debugging it right
now, bad values and JavaScript
tends to lead to a,
you know, food has no
properties or undefined. It's not
defined in any sort of
error message. And that's, that's
no fun at all, But
that's a contract system, not
a type system, right? And
that's an interesting distinction. This
is the station. It's not
a static system that you
can prove facts about. So
it's an open question in
my mind, at least how
much benefit there is to
adding an optional type system,
as opposed to a contract
system, people would like to
write down certain facts about
API APIs, but do they
really need to say this
loop variable is an integer?
I don't think so. And
I think the, the optimization
work you're seeing in JavaScript
engines right now makes that
a moot point as far
as performance, because in the
past it's been said, Oh,
to make your code fast,
you must, you know, add
a colon int type annotation
to your VAR. I that's
used as a loop control
variable. And I just don't
see that that's either fruit
for necessary for performance. The
really interesting type terms that
you'd like to write down
are more like contracts. They
are more like higher order
types and, and ways of
saying things at the API
boundaries, but inside implementation of
the API or inside the
client that uses the API,
you may be able to
have untied code that goes
super fast and doesn't need
heavy pipe sanitation. And how
do you think that that
contract would relate to something
like, like open Ajax, metadata?
I mean, it sounds like
we're all kind of dancing
around. We want to keep
JavaScript fast and loose, but
at the same time we
want our IntelliSense. We want
our tooling. We want better
IDs. You know, there was
a long time there where
everyone was writing JavaScript and
VI and notepad, and suddenly
there was this insane, you
know, this resurgence of IDs
and better tooling and debuggers.
Now we're, we've got people
trying to get into more
metadata. People want IntelliSense for
jQuery. They're, they're adding metadata
and comments. Wouldn't a contract
system. Give them the same
stuff that this open Ajax
metadata would provide. It might,
or a decorator syntax like
you see in other languages
like Python and Java as
well. C-sharp some of the,
sometimes you, you try to
wedge things into this sort
of domain specific decorator language
that really should be properly
thought through in the full,
the main language. But here's
an example. It's not a
contract system. It's a real
type system. This is something
we've explored in the Atmos
script. Fourth edition proposals, a
structural type system would be
a way of describing data,
sort of like Jason data
objects and arrays of strings
and doings and numbers. And
you could write these nested
fashion and these types, these
structural types would not have
names that defines their equality
or that identity. It's not
like running a class declaration
in Java. You're actually saying
it's a record. It has
these three fields. And you
know, the first one is
read and type his number.
And the second one is
green and it's type his
number. And the third one's
blue and it's type his
number. This kind of structural
type system has been used
in some languages. We think
this is possibly more valuable
than a nominal type system
that is a class or
a interface type system. They
both have use cases. They're
somewhat complimentary. But if you
look at how people do
JavaScript today, they program around
Jason, where there's sort of
a latent schema in the
code. There's an implicit implicit
scheme in their heads, programmers,
writing, dynamic languages do write
wall type code. And I
can get into that when
we talk about optimizations, because
at least for Mozilla's approach
with trace monkey, we depend
on there being stable, latent
types in the code. And
indeed there are, Well, we
should talk about that because
I think that JavaScript is
getting incredibly fast, but there's
things that have been around
like rhino, you know, you
know, of course, an open,
an open source implementation of
JavaScript written in Java. Microsoft's
got a managed JavaScript running
in the CLR DLR that
dynamic language runtime. So people
are building these dynamic language
jitters on top of existing
static language jitters, but trace
monkeys and V8 are heading
in a little bit different
way. Aren't they? Yeah, you'll
hear this claim made about
like the job of VM
and the CLR that Dutton,
that runtime, that they were
designed for static languages and
that shows. So when you
have a dynamic line, which
mapped onto them, it doesn't
know its performance well, or
it has to do more
work to optimize itself. It
doesn't get things for free
from the runtime time. And
sometimes the runtime actually gets
in the way, whereas with
something from scratch, like Google's
VA or trace monkey, which
is an evolution of spider
monkey, the interpreter we've had
in Firefox for a long
time, we can do things
just for JavaScript and just
for the dynamic language performance
that we need. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman with a
word from our sponsor. Do
you know how to build
web 2.0 Ajax applications with
web 1.0 components? You really
can't. If you want to
do the next generation web
applications you'll need next generation
components. Just like the ones
that our friends at Telerik
have got their rad controls
for ESPN at Ajax. It's
a huge pack of web
controls built on top of
asp.net Ajax. That'll add previously
impossible performance interactivity to your
next project. The new controls
mirror, the Ajax API from
asp.net. So development is really
straightforward. The client scripts are
shared. So loading time is
not a problem. If you
just set a couple of
properties and you'll be able
to automatically bind a web
services for a really efficient
operation, the new rad editor
from ESPN Ajax, Telerik loads
up to four times faster
than before. And the new
rad grid handles thousands of
records and just milliseconds, but
as always, it's best to
try for yourself. So you
can visit  dot com
slash ASP, net Ajax, and
download a trial. Thanks a
lot. There's some interesting speed
stuff going on up on
your, up in your blog
at Brendan's roadmap updates, you've
got some charts and there's,
there's a little bit of
an arm wrestling match between
trace monkey and V8 VH
seems to be a little
bit obsessed with recursion and
likes to show that they're,
you know, a jillion times
faster in this particular micro
benchmark in your graph, you're
showing that the trace monkey
fair is pretty darn favorable,
but one of the points
that you make is that
you developed it a lot
faster. Then they've been working
on VA for quite awhile.
I don't know if that's
true. I met Lars box
once he's the VM guru
created it. And I think
he works very quickly. I
wouldn't be surprised if he
had gotten the bulk of
the work done very quickly,
so no disrespect intended, but,
but they only released it
after a couple of years
at Google. And that may
have, and frankly that may
have hurt them because when
you do open source development,
it's best to release early
and often. And in fact,
in the Google Chrome comics,
they talk about releasing early
and often, but they didn't
actually do it in this
case. The two approaches are
different though, trace monkey in
VA. And right now we're
working on getting the performance
and recursion to be better.
Google has focused on some
benchmarks, some of which are
kind of macro they're, they're
very object oriented, JavaScript, very
stylized in a way that's
you see on the web
though, in some ways, even
more layered than the web
JavaScript code that I've looked
at and are heavy on
recursion or heavy on sort
of method, method dispatch, and
with praise monkey, we can
inline methods very quickly. If
we can handle all the
case combinations in the spider
monkey bike code, we're simply
working through uncover cases to
stay on trace and not
abort the recording. And as
we do that, you'll see
us get faster and faster
and we'll see how it
goes. I don't want to
brag at all, and I
wouldn't want to claim results
before I had them. But
I, as I said in
the blog, I do believe
that the tracing approach gives
us a unique way of
looking at what the program
is actually doing. It's it's
its current set of values,
the latent types that are
there that may not be
evidenced from a static analysis
of the code. And that
should let us go very
fast. It should let us
specialize as well as inline.
And the combination of inlining
and specializing can keep our
code footprint. Small can make
us generate very tight machine
code that doesn't have to
worry about case analysis at
runtime. VA is probably going
to get into speculation more
and more, but originally when
I looked at it and
I don't know if it's
changed much, they were doing
sort of, is it this
case of the plus operator,
which concatenate shoestrings, or is
it that case of the
plus operator, which adds two
numbers and maybe the optimize
further? Is it the case
of the plus operator where
the number is both can
fit into machine integers and
not overflow into the double
precision floating point that kind
of cogeneration makes for more
code. And because you're doing
those tests, it runs a
little bit slower with tracing.
We can speculate that, Oh,
it's only integers it doesn't
overflow. We're going to put
a very quick garden. So
there's still a little test
overhead, but it's smaller. And
we're going to just use
integers all the way. And
that allows us to do
really well on these micro
benchmarks. He saw us beating
beat on micro benchmarks, I
think more than macro, and
we're just going to have
to keep competing and see
how it levels out. So
just to make sure that
the listeners are falling, this
notion of tracing, I mean,
are you, are you watching
it run slowly once by
basically instrumenting it in, you
know, in real time and
then, and then doing your
nano jetting, does it in
fact run slowly for a
moment or do you, I
mean, this seems like it's
a little bit of a
Schrodinger's cat thing, you know,
did the JavaScript run or
not, I'm not quite clear
on how you are. In
fact seeing this happen versus
doing a static analysis. Sure.
This is based on work
Andrea's gal did for a
PhD thesis under Michael France
at UC Irvine. And it's
it's novel work. It's has
very few predecessors in computer
science research and Andreas is
twist to it made, made
the traces be prettier and
structure and have a sort
of a tree structure that
allows for larger scale optimization.
But we are recording what
the interpreter does. So we
have an interpreter which means
a bytecode interpreter. People probably
know what that is, where
you, you generate a pretend
instruction set. It's like a
little toy language machine language,
and you still there, you
still there, it's still got
an interpreter. VA does not
have an interpreter. They parsed
JavaScript into the trees. And
then they, when they see
something has to run, they
can do this lately. So
they don't have to do
it up ahead of time.
They then go generate machine
code directly. But as I
noted, it's still in general
has to be machine code
that says, is it case
number one is a case.
Number two is a case
number three in order to
handle all the dynamic case
combinations. Whereas with tracing, we
let the interpreter handle loops.
And when the loops look
hot enough, when, when a
simple way of counting loop
frequency trips, we can then
say, okay, we're going to
start a recorder. And that's
just like a VCR for
your interpreter. It's at the
little overhead for that one
iteration that it tries to
record. But if the iteration
complete, if the loop body
control flow, reaches back to
the top of the loop
again, then boarding is done
and we get this beautiful
linear stream of instructions that
we can use modern optimization
techniques on. And because it's
linear, it's a it's it's
branch free. All these modern
optimization techniques become very simple
and efficient. Whereas if you
were using whole method compilation,
I see. Okay. Right, right.
By avoiding a holistic view
by, by actually focusing in,
on giving yourself tunnel vision,
then you make things look
more linear than by taking
it, but basically a small
bite at a time. Yeah.
And like I said, my
blog, you, you free the
interpreter from being neurotic about
while the same thing didn't
happen next time, but I'm
going to keep testing just
in case something might change.
You know, they say the
definition of neurosis is doing
the same thing over and
over expecting a different result.
And the interpreter is doing
this sort of case analysis
that the generated VA code
is doing its thing. Is
it a string? Is it
an integer? I don't know
it could change. But when
you record a trace, you
stipulate, well, it's an imager
types are stable. And then
in a programming language programming,
we're going to put a
very efficient guard instruction that
will bail out if it's
not an integer. And then
we're going to proceed, assuming
that it's an integer. And
because you have this linear
loop body fragment, this is
trace. You can consolidate the
guards. You can eliminate guards.
You don't need, you can
consolidate various kinds of loads
and stores and you can
make the code very tight.
How much faster can this
get? I mean, how much
headroom is there? Is there
another factor of 10 improvement
that's hiding somewhere? Or, I
mean, when, when are we
going to say we're done?
So are these micro benchmarks
we're getting close to sort
of the speed of a
unoptimized C compiler? I think
Mike shaver shows in his
blog running GCC with a
minus Oh zero or some,
you know, turn off the
optimizer. And we were getting
close to that. So we
don't need to go 10
X faster. We're going to
hit the speed limits that
are inherent in the machine
code. You know, hand tuned
machine code can be to
seek and power still, but
it's really not worth it.
If you're going to see
two X improvements or three
X linear, small factors, we
haven't even got a decent
register allocator and trace monkey.
Yet we haven't done some
redundant garden and load and
store elimination, optimizations that are
easy to do. They're just
work that we haven't had
time to get to yet.
And when we get to
them, you'll see doubling and
tripling, I think. And that
will help because apart from
the benchmarks where we're falling
off the trace and you
see our speed in the
sort of long tail presentation
on my blog, get back
to where the interpreter is.
We would be great as
the interpreter, essentially, we don't
get any getting better speed
up as, as we get
those cases covered, we'll start
to get speed ups and
those benchmarks too. And then
I think across the board,
you'll see this sort of
10 to 2030 X speed
up from what was in
Firefox three, which was just
the interpreter. Now, doesn't it
seem like we're talking about
theoretical stuff. We're talking about
JavaScript as a language, doing
things like, like Ray tracing,
but you know, who's really
gonna rate trace with JavaScript.
Doesn't it? I mean, with
any language things get slow
when you hit the disc.
And in this instance, JavaScript
hitting quote unquote for disc
is talking to the Dom,
are we then going to
move our focus towards Dominic
isolation as being, being faster?
Cause that's when JavaScript is
as fast as C things
are going to get slow.
When we start generating our
dibs dynamically and all that
kind of stuff. When we
start doing our jQuery work,
That's true. And so we're
working on tracing into the
Dom because the same sort
of beautiful specialization you can
do with this, this trace
tree approach that Andre scout
pioneer applies to the dong
code. In fact, the Don
code in most browsers is
a bunch of C plus
plus and it's object oriented
C plus plus. So it
has what are called virtual
methods. So it, it has
some amount of polymorphism, some
amount of, of the ability
to make similar types look
like a single type, and
that has a cost to
it. But the bad thing
about it is that apart
from any sort of profile
guided optimization, you throw out
the compiler, it really doesn't
know what's going on in
the trace, but if you
could trace into the Dom,
then you could make the
same sort of type speculations
that we're doing in the
pure JavaScript world. And you
can make your Dom code
go really fast. That's point
number one, number two is
that there are elements like
the canvas tag that's in
Firefox and as far as
an opera, and there are
ways to sort of shim
it into I E and
I hope Microsoft implements it
cause they, they can easily
do it. The canvas tag
gives you a low level
sort of rectangular programmable image,
and you can get different
kinds of APIs to draw
to it. This is a
standard 2d fin transform API,
there's other proposed API APIs.
We have one that's open
G L E S for
3d and texture shading, and
using the GPU. Even when
you get really fast JavaScript
and the canvas tag, maybe
you don't need a Dom.
Maybe you make your own
Dom and JavaScript because Hey,
the thumb is just an
old standard from the nineties.
Do we, do we really
think that's the last word
on object models? And certainly
not for games, games have
their own scene graphs and
their own ways of doing,
you know, a level of
detail. So I think super
fast JavaScript plus canvas is
going to be huge. You're
going to see not only
games, but sort of visualization
tools and, and all sorts
of things. Well, doesn't that
mean? If you add canvas,
you have super fast JavaScript
and you have video, you
have HTML five and the
video tag don't what do
you need a flex? And
Silverlight for, That's a good
question. And Adobe has been
a good partner, certainly contributing
Tamar. And we used the
Tameron tracing nano jet as
a big boost to trace
monkey development. It's a little
backend for recording traces at
a low level and generating
machine code. It's sort of
low level intermediate form code
back end cogeneration backend. So
we, we have to make
browsers better. It's just in
our DNA. The web has
to evolve and it is
evolving. And at some point
I think this, this becomes
disruptive to things like flash
and Silverlight now flash still
has lots of value to
offer. And, you know, Silverlight
is in many ways a
flash quote. So those will
be around. They have tools,
find tools that I don't
think anybody's really seen on
the open website of it
though. Aptana and the open
Ajax guys, you know, there's
efforts there, our own efforts
and tools have been more
about doing it by hand,
but also Firebug this sort
of integrated debugger that gives
you complete visibility on the
sort of computed styles and
the cascade of CSS styles
and gives you a little
ways to tweak things and,
and see all the, the
network latencies in your HTTP
requests. We're going to work
on Firebag, we're investing more
in it and we're going
to make it even better.
And I think JavaScript debugging
is going to become really
good. Like you'll, you'll get
time traveling debuggers. So let
you go back and see
where that bad value came
from. Things like that. So
I think there'll be a
lot of coexistence among flashover
light and the open web,
but, and this is what
I'm working on. So maybe
I'm biased. I think the
open web will become just
as competent. Maybe not quite
as coherent. When you have
these single vendor proprietary stacks,
you can make something that's
laser light, coherent, as far
as developer docs and polished
API and a tool experience.
That's really nice. You asked
about things like five down
auto complete Firebug just has
a bunch of tables of
well-known Dom property names and
JavaScript keywords. And you can
go a long way with
that. So depending on, on
the nature of the dynamic
language and whether you really
need those type annotations to
go fast, maybe we can
do sort of a 90%
case versus better case that
has good tools. And I
think that's, that's something to
work on. The webs OpenWeb
tooling is not where it
should be worked to get
where it should be. I
don't think it would look
exactly like eclipse. I think
it would be lighter weight.
I think it might be
a more integrated in where
like Firebug Yeah, so it
sounds like five years down
the road, JavaScript is C
speed. It's competitive with flash
and server light. And maybe
not even as coherent on
the page, cause certainly with
flash and Silverlight you kind
of draw a square and
you say that this is
where flashes, and this is
where several light is in
the nose. There's bridges that
go back and forth. But
I assume you think that
there's a benefit to having
no having no bridge to
not having to jump inside
or out of the, the
object tag? I think so.
I mean the podium vendors,
and I say this as
someone who appreciates flash for
what it does, when you,
when you encounter a flash
plugging, you may not have
the events work, right. Or
the tab key might not
take focus into the plug
in or take it out
again, these are bugs that
we're working on with Adobe,
we're trying to fix, but
there will always be such
bugs because you have the
separate code base of the
plugin and you have this
sort of narrow plugging API
that we've been working to
evolve that which goes back
to Netscape Netscape 1.1 release.
I think so for or
on Microsoft side, you have
active X. There's just sort
of the plugin is the
other in some politically incorrect
sense. And it, it, it
gets put in the penalty
box in various ways. Or
if you build all your
code on the plugin side,
then the browser seems like
it's in the penalty box
and it seems less, less
polished and less flashy. So
this, this kind of seemed
full experience is, is an
app amount of designers and
a lot of users. So
I think it should go
away and the market forces
will tend to make it
go away over time. How
are we going to get
out of a backward compatibility?
I mean, isn't navigator dot
plugins and its all of
its history and all of
its quirks and its lack
of clean versioning and people
splitting open the descriptions to
look for tunneled versions and
all those kinds of things
are they're going to be
with us forever. I mean
there's backward compatibility and JavaScript.
That seems like it's hamstrung
it's, it'll be there forever.
Don't you think It could
be? The web is a
shortest path evolution plus compatibility
til it hurts. But you
know, it's changed the way
you look at pages from
10 or 12 years ago
that used the tables of
that era and maybe they
use spacer images. They don't
work right now. And that's
a good thing. So you
find that the intersection semantics
between the browser's moves and
what developers target moves and
you know, we're done with
. I think different locales
may have different opinions on
that one, but I six
is still kind of an
albatross hope. It goes away.
Soon things like Google gears
will help to uplift new
web features into it. The
mobile web will will cause
I think a big shift
toward more modern implementations of
web standards because I think
the iPhone did open people's
eyes that even though there's
a fair amount of iPhone,
only content is not quite
open web, but some of
it's tied into, you know,
the exact screen dimensions to
the iPhone or even to
Apple's platform, but be that
as it may, they did
move people away from sort
of the whap WML, you
know, mobile web. This is
the thing that was still
kind of a threat to
the open web a couple
of years ago. So mobile
is going to, I think
help modernize standard support and
obsolete old web content that
just isn't isn't worth keeping
compatibility with, but you can't
really predict this. This is
something that I keep saying
in the context of JavaScript,
you have to be careful
not to try to say,
Oh, we broke compatibility and
you should know better. You
should go use our new
feature. Y instead of that
battle feature X, but that
doesn't work often. You're not
even talking to a developer.
The developer resilient was a
contractor on a gig five
years ago and they're long
gone. All you've done is
make the user suffer. You
know, your mom at home,
the page doesn't work. Right.
What good did you do?
So compatibility has to be
kept until it hurts, but
you have to keep using
the carrot of innovative new
features and can keep competitive
browsers being numerous being used
in contexts like the mobile
web and in desktop settings,
like Firefox is compete and
good things will happen. Okay.
That's fantastic. I got one
last question. I know you've
got to go, but what
do you think of jQuery?
And do you think that
jQuery and some of the
framework that kind of explosion
of frameworks really kind of
raise the water level and
kind of reminded people that
JavaScript was still out there?
Was it the popularity and
the flexibility of those frameworks
that, that reminded people that
you could really do some
powerful stuff with JavaScript? Oh,
I love jQuery and I
should give a disclaimer, John
Reznik works for Mozilla and
he is just very bright
and great. It's wonderful to
see them do demos. He'll
do them without a net
in his editor and then
he'll reload and show the
effects that jQuery has. And
he did amazing stuff with
processing this visualization language from
MIT. Yeah. We had John
LASIK on the show last
week. Did, did he work
for Mozilla when he wrote
jQuery? We got him. I
think after he wants to
say queer. I remember I
met him at the, the
Ajax experience in 2006 in
Boston in the fall. And
I thought, wow, another ATF
library, isn't it too late.
But of course jQuery is
really just zoomed the prominence
since then, you know, you
have to give credit to
dojo and prototype and others
that came before. I have
a soft spot for mochi
kit. All these are good.
We're still in the early
days. So people are not
just building better agents, libraries
like jQuery. They're also building
plugins for there were higher
level, no turtles on the
backs of turtles to do
things like make it really
easy to not just build
your user interface or a
widget, but your whole app.
And we're seeing that now
that kind of evolution with
JavaScript frameworks coming online and
it's pretty exciting times. So,
So it doesn't seem to
me like you think that
we're anywhere near the top
of the popularity curve of
JavaScript? No, I think that,
that just now with these
high performance engines, people are
starting to think, but when
they actually get them in
their hands and can use
them, it's just going to
be amazing. Fantastic. Well, thank
you so much, Brendan. Eich
for sitting down with me
today. I really appreciate your
time. My pleasure. This has
been another episode of Hansel
minutes and we'll see you
again next week.